README.md, before:

# Global Food & Nutrition Explorer

This is the group project for EAS 550: Data Models and Query Languages, submitted by Akash Ankush Kamble, Nidhi Rajani, and Goutham Chengalvala.

## Project Overview

The "Global Food & Nutrition Explorer" is a database application designed to ingest, clean, and structure the vast Open Food Facts dataset. Our goal is to transform this raw, complex data into a normalized relational database, making it accessible for nutritional analysis and consumer insights.

This repository contains the complete pipeline for Phase 1, which focuses on building a robust and secure database foundation.

## Phase 1: Database Foundation (OLTP)

### Core Technologies

- **Containerization:** Docker & Docker Compose
- **Database:** PostgreSQL 15
- **Data Ingestion & Logic:** Python 3, Pandas, SQLAlchemy
- **Version Control:** Git & GitHub

### How to Run the Pipeline

**Prerequisites:**

- Docker Desktop installed and running.
- Python 3.8+ and `pip` installed.

### Step 1: Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Gouthamch07/EAS550_Project.git
cd EAS550_Project
```

**Step 2: Set Up the Python Environment**
It is recommended to use a virtual environment.

```bash
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

**Step 3: Launch the Database**
This command will start the PostgreSQL and pgAdmin containers. On the first run, it will automatically create the database schema and security roles by executing the files in the `sql/` directory.

```bash
docker-compose -f docker/docker-compose.yml up -d
```

**Step 4: Run the Data Ingestion Script**
This script will download the raw data, clean it, and populate the running database.

```bash
python scripts/ingest_data.py
```

The pipeline is now complete! The database `food_nutrition_db` is fully populated and ready for querying.

### Accessing the Database

You can connect to the database using any standard SQL client or the included pgAdmin interface.

- **pgAdmin URL:** `http://localhost:8080`
- **Email:** `admin@food-nutrition.com`
- **Password:** `admin`

**Server Connection Details:**

- **Host:** `food_nutrition_db`
- **Port:** `5432`
- **Database:** `food_nutrition_db`
- **Username/Password:** Use the `postgres` superuser, `analyst_user`, or `app_service_user` credentials.

If you need a video demonstration of the setup process, please refer to the following link: [Video Demonstration](https://youtu.be/WSvt6auAOsg)

---

## Phase 2: Analytical Layer & Optimization (OLAP)

**Goal**: Analyze the data using advanced SQL, optimize query performance, and build a Data Warehouse.

**Key Features**:

- **Advanced Analytics**: Complex SQL queries using Window Functions, CTEs, and Aggregations to answer business questions (e.g., Brand Leaderboards, Hidden Sugar detection).
- **Performance Tuning**: Implementation of B-Tree and GIN indexes to optimize query execution. Detailed analysis is available in [Performance_Tuning_Report.md](./Performance_Tuning_Report.md).
- **Data Warehousing**: Transformation of the 3NF schema into a Star Schema using dbt, enabling efficient OLAP workflows.

**How to Run Phase 2**:

**1. Run Analytical Queries**
Execute the advanced business queries against the populated database:

`docker exec -i food_nutrition_db psql -U postgres -d food_nutrition_db < sql/phase2/analytics_queries.sql`

**2. Run Performance Tuning Tests**  
Execute the baseline measurement, index creation, and optimized measurement scripts:

`docker exec -i food_nutrition_db psql -U postgres -d food_nutrition_db < sql/phase2/performance_tuning.sql`

**3. Build the Data Warehouse (dbt)**  
To transform the data into the Star Schema (`analytics` schema):

```bash
# Install dbt adapter (if not already installed)
pip install dbt-postgres

# Navigate to the dbt project directory
cd food_explorer

# Run the models to create the Fact and Dimension tables
dbt run
```

---

### Connecting to the Database

You can connect to the database using any standard SQL client or the included pgAdmin interface.

- **pgAdmin URL:**  `<http://localhost:8080>`
- **Email:**  `<admin@food-nutrition.com>`
- **Password:**  `admin`

**Server Connection Details:**

- **Host:**  `food_nutrition_db`
- **Port:**  `5432`
- **Database:**  `food_nutrition_db`
- **Username/Password:** Use the `postgres` superuser, `analyst_user`, or `app_service_user` credentials.

---

## Phase 3: The Application Layer (Streamlit Dashboard)

**Goal:** Provide an interactive, user-friendly interface to explore the nutritional data.

### Features

- **Nutritional Deep Dive:** Interactive charts analyzing Nutri-Score distributions across categories.
- **Poor Nutrition Detector:** A tool to identify high-sugar/low-quality products using configurable thresholds.
- **Data Lineage:** Powered by the Phase 2 Star Schema (`analytics` schema) for high-performance querying.
- **Live Database Connection:** Real-time connection to the PostgreSQL container.

### How to Run the App

**Prerequisites:**
Ensure you have completed Phase 1 (Database Ingestion) and Phase 2 (dbt transformation) before running the app.

#### Step 1: Grant Permissions to the Analyst

Since the `analytics` schema was created by dbt *after* the initial security setup, you must manually grant read permissions to the analyst role. Run this command in your terminal:

```bash
docker exec -it food_nutrition_db psql -U postgres -d food_nutrition_db -c "GRANT USAGE ON SCHEMA analytics TO read_only_analyst; GRANT SELECT ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA analytics TO read_only_analyst; ALTER DEFAULT PRIVILEGES IN SCHEMA analytics GRANT SELECT ON TABLES TO read_only_analyst;"
```

#### Step 2: Build and Launch the Application

1. **Start the Environment:**

   ```bash
   docker-compose -f docker/docker-compose.yml up -d --build
   ```

2. **Access the Dashboard:**
    Open your browser and navigate to:
    👉 <http://localhost:8501>

3. **Troubleshooting:**
    If the app cannot connect to the database immediately, wait 10 seconds for Postgres to initialize and refresh the page.

Commit message:

docs: Add instructions for setting up and running dbt for the data warehouse

README.md, after:

# Global Food & Nutrition Explorer

This is the group project for EAS 550: Data Models and Query Languages, submitted by Akash Ankush Kamble, Nidhi Rajani, and Goutham Chengalvala.

## Project Overview

The "Global Food & Nutrition Explorer" is a database application designed to ingest, clean, and structure the vast Open Food Facts dataset. Our goal is to transform this raw, complex data into a normalized relational database, making it accessible for nutritional analysis and consumer insights.

This repository contains the complete pipeline for Phase 1, which focuses on building a robust and secure database foundation.

## Phase 1: Database Foundation (OLTP)

### Core Technologies

- **Containerization:** Docker & Docker Compose
- **Database:** PostgreSQL 15
- **Data Ingestion & Logic:** Python 3, Pandas, SQLAlchemy
- **Version Control:** Git & GitHub

### How to Run the Pipeline

**Prerequisites:**

- Docker Desktop installed and running.
- Python 3.8+ and `pip` installed.

### Step 1: Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Gouthamch07/EAS550_Project.git
cd EAS550_Project
```

**Step 2: Set Up the Python Environment**
It is recommended to use a virtual environment.

```bash
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

**Step 3: Launch the Database**
This command will start the PostgreSQL and pgAdmin containers. On the first run, it will automatically create the database schema and security roles by executing the files in the `sql/` directory.

```bash
docker-compose -f docker/docker-compose.yml up -d
```

**Step 4: Run the Data Ingestion Script**
This script will download the raw data, clean it, and populate the running database.

```bash
python scripts/ingest_data.py
```

The pipeline is now complete! The database `food_nutrition_db` is fully populated and ready for querying.

### Accessing the Database

You can connect to the database using any standard SQL client or the included pgAdmin interface.

- **pgAdmin URL:** `http://localhost:8080`
- **Email:** `admin@food-nutrition.com`
- **Password:** `admin`

**Server Connection Details:**

- **Host:** `food_nutrition_db`
- **Port:** `5432`
- **Database:** `food_nutrition_db`
- **Username/Password:** Use the `postgres` superuser, `analyst_user`, or `app_service_user` credentials.

If you need a video demonstration of the setup process, please refer to the following link: [Video Demonstration](https://youtu.be/WSvt6auAOsg)

---

## Phase 2: Analytical Layer & Optimization (OLAP)

**Goal**: Analyze the data using advanced SQL, optimize query performance, and build a Data Warehouse.

**Key Features**:

- **Advanced Analytics**: Complex SQL queries using Window Functions, CTEs, and Aggregations to answer business questions (e.g., Brand Leaderboards, Hidden Sugar detection).
- **Performance Tuning**: Implementation of B-Tree and GIN indexes to optimize query execution. Detailed analysis is available in [Performance_Tuning_Report.md](./Performance_Tuning_Report.md).
- **Data Warehousing**: Transformation of the 3NF schema into a Star Schema using dbt, enabling efficient OLAP workflows.

**How to Run Phase 2**:

**1. Run Analytical Queries**
Execute the advanced business queries against the populated database:

`docker exec -i food_nutrition_db psql -U postgres -d food_nutrition_db < sql/phase2/analytics_queries.sql`

**2. Run Performance Tuning Tests**  
Execute the baseline measurement, index creation, and optimized measurement scripts:

`docker exec -i food_nutrition_db psql -U postgres -d food_nutrition_db < sql/phase2/performance_tuning.sql`

**3. Build the Data Warehouse (dbt)**  
To transform the data into the Star Schema (`analytics` schema):

```bash
# Install dbt adapter (if not already installed)
pip install dbt-postgres
```

### Setting up the Data Warehouse (dbt)

To initialize the dbt project locally, run the following command and enter the configuration details when prompted:

```bash
dbt init
```

#### Enter the following values when prompted:

```bash
Which database would you like to use? [1, 2, 3, ...] (enter the number pertaining to 'postgres')
host   : localhost
port   : 5432 (default)
user   : postgres
pass   : password
dbname : food_nutrition_db
schema : analytics
threads: 1 (default)
```

#### Running the dbt Models

```bash
# Navigate to the dbt project directory
cd food_explorer

# Run the models to create the Fact and Dimension tables
dbt run
```

---

### Connecting to the Database

You can connect to the database using any standard SQL client or the included pgAdmin interface.

- **pgAdmin URL:**  `<http://localhost:8080>`
- **Email:**  `<admin@food-nutrition.com>`
- **Password:**  `admin`

**Server Connection Details:**

- **Host:**  `food_nutrition_db`
- **Port:**  `5432`
- **Database:**  `food_nutrition_db`
- **Username/Password:** Use the `postgres` superuser, `analyst_user`, or `app_service_user` credentials.

---

## Phase 3: The Application Layer (Streamlit Dashboard)

**Goal:** Provide an interactive, user-friendly interface to explore the nutritional data.

### Features

- **Nutritional Deep Dive:** Interactive charts analyzing Nutri-Score distributions across categories.
- **Poor Nutrition Detector:** A tool to identify high-sugar/low-quality products using configurable thresholds.
- **Data Lineage:** Powered by the Phase 2 Star Schema (`analytics` schema) for high-performance querying.
- **Live Database Connection:** Real-time connection to the PostgreSQL container.

### How to Run the App

**Prerequisites:**
Ensure you have completed Phase 1 (Database Ingestion) and Phase 2 (dbt transformation) before running the app.

#### Step 1: Grant Permissions to the Analyst

Since the `analytics` schema was created by dbt *after* the initial security setup, you must manually grant read permissions to the analyst role. Run this command in your terminal:

```bash
docker exec -it food_nutrition_db psql -U postgres -d food_nutrition_db -c "GRANT USAGE ON SCHEMA analytics TO read_only_analyst; GRANT SELECT ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA analytics TO read_only_analyst; ALTER DEFAULT PRIVILEGES IN SCHEMA analytics GRANT SELECT ON TABLES TO read_only_analyst;"
```

#### Step 2: Build and Launch the Application

1. **Start the Environment:**

   ```bash
   docker-compose -f docker/docker-compose.yml up -d --build
   ```

2. **Access the Dashboard:**
    Open your browser and navigate to:
    👉 <http://localhost:8501>

3. **Troubleshooting:**
    If the app cannot connect to the database immediately, wait 10 seconds for Postgres to initialize and refresh the page.
